README.rst, before:

ada-url
========

This is ``ada_url``, a Python library for working with URLs based on the ``Ada`` URL
parser.

* `Documentation <https://ada-url.readthedocs.io>`__
* `Development <https://github.com/ada-url/ada-python/>`__
* `Ada <https://www.ada-url.com/>`__ 

Installation
------------

Install from `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/ada-url/>`__:

.. code-block:: sh

    pip install ada_url

Usage examples
--------------

Parsing URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``URL`` class is intended to match the one described in the
`WHATWG URL spec <https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#url-class>`_:.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> urlobj = URL('https://example.org/path/../file.txt')
    >>> urlobj.href
    'https://example.org/path/file.txt'

The ``parse_url`` function returns a dictionary of all URL elements:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import parse_url
    >>> parse_url('https://user:pass@example.org:80/api?q=1#2')
    {
        'href': 'https://user:pass@example.org:80/api?q=1#2',
        'username': 'user',
        'password': 'pass',
        'protocol': 'https:',
        'port': '80',
        'hostname': 'example.org',
        'host': 'example.org:80',
        'pathname': '/api',
        'search': '?q=1',
        'hash': '#2',
        'origin': 'https://example.org:80',
        'host_type': <HostType.DEFAULT: 0>,
        'scheme_type': <SchemeType.HTTPS: 2>
    }

Altering URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Replacing URL components with the ``URL`` class:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> urlobj = URL('https://example.org/path/../file.txt')
    >>> urlobj.host = 'example.com'
    >>> urlobj.href
    'https://example.com/file.txt'

Replacing URL components with the ``replace_url`` function:

    >>> from ada_url import replace_url
    >>> replace_url('https://example.org/path/../file.txt', host='example.com')
    'https://example.com/file.txt'

Search parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``URLSearchParams`` class is intended to match the one described in the
`WHATWG URL spec <https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#interface-urlsearchparams>`__.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URLSearchParams
    >>> obj = URLSearchParams('key1=value1&key2=value2')
    >>> list(obj.items())
    [('key1', 'value1'), ('key2', 'value2')]

The ``parse_search_params`` function returns a dictionary of search keys mapped to
value lists:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import parse_search_params
    >>> parse_search_params('key1=value1&key2=value2')
    {'key1': ['value1'], 'key2': ['value2']}

Internationalized domain names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``idna`` class can encode and decode IDNs:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import idna
    >>> idna.encode('Bücher.example')
    b'xn--bcher-kva.example'
    >>> idna.decode(b'xn--bcher-kva.example')
    'bücher.example'

WHATWG URL compliance
---------------------

This library is compliant with the WHATWG URL spec. This means, among other things,
that it properly encodes IDNs and resolves paths:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> parsed_url = URL('https://www.GOoglé.com/./path/../path2/')
    >>> parsed_url.hostname
    'www.xn--googl-fsa.com'
    >>> parsed_url.pathname
    '/path2/'

Contrast that with the Python standard library's ``urlib.parse`` module:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from urllib.parse import urlparse
    >>> parsed_url = urlparse('https://www.GOoglé.com/./path/../path2/')
    >>> parsed_url.hostname
    'www.googlé.com'
    >>> parsed_url.path
    '/./path/../path2/'

Commit message:

[skip ci] documenting can_ada and standard compliance

README.rst, after:

ada-url
========

The `urlib.parse`` module in Python does not follow the legacy RFC 3978 standard nor
does it follow the newer WHATWG URL specification. It is also relatively slow.

This is ``ada_url``, a fast standard-compliant Python library for working with URLs based on the ``Ada`` URL
parser.

* `Documentation <https://ada-url.readthedocs.io>`__
* `Development <https://github.com/ada-url/ada-python/>`__
* `Ada <https://www.ada-url.com/>`__ 

Installation
------------

Install from `PyPI <https://pypi.org/project/ada-url/>`__:

.. code-block:: sh

    pip install ada_url

Usage examples
--------------

Parsing URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``URL`` class is intended to match the one described in the
`WHATWG URL spec <https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#url-class>`_:.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> urlobj = URL('https://example.org/path/../file.txt')
    >>> urlobj.href
    'https://example.org/path/file.txt'

The ``parse_url`` function returns a dictionary of all URL elements:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import parse_url
    >>> parse_url('https://user:pass@example.org:80/api?q=1#2')
    {
        'href': 'https://user:pass@example.org:80/api?q=1#2',
        'username': 'user',
        'password': 'pass',
        'protocol': 'https:',
        'port': '80',
        'hostname': 'example.org',
        'host': 'example.org:80',
        'pathname': '/api',
        'search': '?q=1',
        'hash': '#2',
        'origin': 'https://example.org:80',
        'host_type': <HostType.DEFAULT: 0>,
        'scheme_type': <SchemeType.HTTPS: 2>
    }

Altering URLs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Replacing URL components with the ``URL`` class:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> urlobj = URL('https://example.org/path/../file.txt')
    >>> urlobj.host = 'example.com'
    >>> urlobj.href
    'https://example.com/file.txt'

Replacing URL components with the ``replace_url`` function:

    >>> from ada_url import replace_url
    >>> replace_url('https://example.org/path/../file.txt', host='example.com')
    'https://example.com/file.txt'

Search parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``URLSearchParams`` class is intended to match the one described in the
`WHATWG URL spec <https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#interface-urlsearchparams>`__.

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URLSearchParams
    >>> obj = URLSearchParams('key1=value1&key2=value2')
    >>> list(obj.items())
    [('key1', 'value1'), ('key2', 'value2')]

The ``parse_search_params`` function returns a dictionary of search keys mapped to
value lists:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import parse_search_params
    >>> parse_search_params('key1=value1&key2=value2')
    {'key1': ['value1'], 'key2': ['value2']}

Internationalized domain names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``idna`` class can encode and decode IDNs:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import idna
    >>> idna.encode('Bücher.example')
    b'xn--bcher-kva.example'
    >>> idna.decode(b'xn--bcher-kva.example')
    'bücher.example'

WHATWG URL compliance
---------------------

This library is compliant with the WHATWG URL spec. This means, among other things,
that it properly encodes IDNs and resolves paths:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from ada_url import URL
    >>> parsed_url = URL('https://www.GOoglé.com/./path/../path2/')
    >>> parsed_url.hostname
    'www.xn--googl-fsa.com'
    >>> parsed_url.pathname
    '/path2/'

Contrast that with the Python standard library's ``urlib.parse`` module:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from urllib.parse import urlparse
    >>> parsed_url = urlparse('https://www.GOoglé.com/./path/../path2/')
    >>> parsed_url.hostname
    'www.googlé.com'
    >>> parsed_url.path
    '/./path/../path2/'

Alternative (can_ada)
-----------

The ada-python bindings are built on CFFI, an approach that has the binding between C and Python written in Python itself, which loses some of the performance benefits of using Ada in the first place when most of the time is spent just making the function call.

The can_ada (Canadian Ada) is a different Python binding that uses pybind11 to generate the binding code, which is then compiled into a Python extension module. This approach has the potential to be much faster than the ada-python bindings. See  https://tkte.ch/articles/2024/03/15/parsing-urls-in-python.html
